Added initial ORT Extensions docs for onnxruntime website (#16723)
microsoft/onnxruntime: docs/extensions/index.md

---
title: Extensions
has_children: true
nav_order: 7
---

# ONNXRuntime-Extensions

[![Build Status](https://dev.azure.com/onnxruntime/onnxruntime/_apis/build/status%2Fmicrosoft.onnxruntime-extensions?branchName=main)](https://dev.azure.com/onnxruntime/onnxruntime/_build/latest?definitionId=209&branchName=main)

## What is ONNXRuntime-Extensions?

> Introduction: ONNXRuntime-Extensions is a library that extends the capability of the ONNX models and inference with ONNX Runtime, via ONNX Runtime Custom Operator ABIs. It includes a set of [ONNX Runtime Custom Operators](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/reference/operators/add-custom-op.html) to support the common pre- and post-processing operators for audio, vision, text, and NLP models. ONNXRuntime-Extensions also supports multiple languages and platforms, like Python on Windows/Linux/macOS, some mobile platforms like Android and iOS, and Web-Assembly etc. The basic workflow is to enhance a ONNX model firstly and then do the model inference with ONNX Runtime and ONNXRuntime-Extensions package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ONNXRuntime-Extensions is a library that extends the capability of the ONNX models and inference with ONNX Runtime, via ONNX Runtime Custom Operator ABIs. It includes a set of Custom Operators to support common model pre- and post-processing for audio, vision, text, and language models. As with ONNX Runtime, Extensions also supports multiple languages and platforms (Python on Windows/Linux/macOS, Android and iOS mobile platforms and Web-Assembly for web.

The basic workflow is to add the custom operators to an ONNX model and then to perform inference on the enhanced model with ONNX Runtime and ONNXRuntime-Extensions packages.
```

<img src="../../images/combine-ai-extensions-img.png" alt="Pre and post-processing custom operators for vision, text, and NLP models" width="100%"/>
<sub>This image was created using <a href="https://github.com/sayanshaw24/combine" target="_blank">Combine.AI</a>, which is powered by Bing Chat, Bing Image Creator, and EdgeGPT.</sub>

> ### Quickstart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Quickstart
```

> ## Installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### **Python installation**

Reviewer: Add other package formats: nuget, android ios etc

Author: added it for NuGet! for the mobile installations, i am not super sure myself and don't want to mess it up, @skottmckay @edgchen1 could one of you assist with this?

```bash
pip install onnxruntime-extensions
````

> ### **Nightly Build**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### **Nightly Build**
```

> #### <strong>on Windows</strong>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### on Windows
```

```cmd
pip install --index-url https://aiinfra.pkgs.visualstudio.com/PublicPackages/_packaging/ORT-Nightly/pypi/simple/ onnxruntime-extensions
```
Please ensure that you have met the prerequisites of onnxruntime-extensions (e.g., onnx and onnxruntime) in your Python environment.
#### <strong>on Linux/macOS</strong>
Please make sure the compiler toolkit like gcc(later than g++ 8.0) or clang are installed before the following command
```bash
python -m pip install git+https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime-extensions.git
```

## Prepare the pre/post-processing ONNX model

> With onnxruntime-extensions Python package, you can easily get the ONNX processing graph by converting them from Huggingface transformer data processing classes such as in the following example:

Reviewer: We discussed giving a small example here then referencing the other methods of enhancing the model.

Author: right, apologies i missed that! just added some, you can also add any others i might have missed.

```python
import onnxruntime as _ort
from transformers import AutoTokenizer
from onnxruntime_extensions import OrtPyFunction, gen_processing_models

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained('distilbert-base-uncased')
model = OrtPyFunction(gen_processing_models(tokenizer, pre_kwargs={})[0])
```

For more information, you can check API using the following:
```python
help(onnxruntime_extensions.gen_processing_models)
```

> ### NOTE: These data processing model can be merged into other model [onnx.compose](https://onnx.ai/onnx/api/compose.html) if needed.

Reviewer: Remove the bold and add this to a list of possible ways of enhancing the model

Reviewer: Definitely want to include the pipeline method here: https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime-extensions/tree/main/onnxruntime_extensions/tools/pre_post_processing

Author: done!

> ## Inference with ONNX Runtime Extensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Inference with ONNX Runtime and Extensions
```

### Python
There are individual packages for the following languages, please install it for the build.
```python
import onnxruntime as _ort
from onnxruntime_extensions import get_library_path as _lib_path

so = _ort.SessionOptions()
so.register_custom_ops_library(_lib_path())

# Run the ONNXRuntime Session as per ONNXRuntime docs suggestions.
sess = _ort.InferenceSession(model, so)
sess.run (...)
```
### C++

```c++
  // The line loads the customop library into ONNXRuntime engine to load the ONNX model with the custom op
  Ort::ThrowOnError(Ort::GetApi().RegisterCustomOpsLibrary((OrtSessionOptions*)session_options, custom_op_library_filename, &handle));

  // The regular ONNXRuntime invoking to run the model.
  Ort::Session session(env, model_uri, session_options);
  RunSession(session, inputs, outputs);
```
### Java
```java
var env = OrtEnvironment.getEnvironment();
var sess_opt = new OrtSession.SessionOptions();

/* Register the custom ops from onnxruntime-extensions */
sess_opt.registerCustomOpLibrary(OrtxPackage.getLibraryPath());
```

### C#

> ```C#

Reviewer: C# formatting not working

Author: likely a jekyll issue because it works in the md preview - changed it to java as the styling is the same
